# nvgt user directory
When building NVGT, one may want to include a custom config file or link with plugins that they don't want to be part of the public repository. While a user who downloads a packaged nvgt sourcecode release from the internet will not need to concern themselves with something like this as they'll never be combining such a download with git, anyone who works directly with the nvgt github repository may need to worry about custom nvgt_config.h changes being overwritten / at least experiencing merge conflicts, or a contributor may accidentally commit a private plugin that is part of their game. This user directory is my current solution to these problems.

This directory has the following properties:
* the .gitignore in the root of the nvgt repository causes all files you place in here to be ignored by git, only readme.md from this folder is tracked.
* As long as you are using scons or more specifically if the NVGT_USER_CONFIG macro is defined and if a file called nvgt_config.h exists in this directory, nvgt's code will load the one in the user directory instead of the default in the src folder.
* If a file called _SConscript exists in the user directory, the SConstruct build script in the root of the nvgt repository will execute it. Two environments will be exported to this _SConscript, those being nvgt_env and plugin_env. The first is the environment used to build the engine's core and stubs, while the latter more minimal environment is used to build plugins and thus should be used for any custom plugins you add in the user directory.
* if a file called static_plugins exists containing a linear list of plugin names, those plugins will be linked statically to NVGT upon build.

As nvgt's main developer, with this setup I am able to safely work directly with the public NVGT repository even as I am building the engine for Survive the Wild which uses a custom configuration file and set of plugins. I don't need to keep a separate copy of the entire repository up-to-date, nore must I worry about accidentally pushing a private configuration file to the public repository because I accidentally fumbled a command to switch branches or contexts or something. I can have as many nvgt_config.h files in here with different names, and before a build, I can rename whatever file I want to use to nvgt_config.h to build nvgt with that particular security system, same with static_plugins files.
